[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Namaste and
welcome to Thrive--
Self-Healing with Ayurveda.
My name's Kishan Shah.
And in this video
we're going to do yoga
for strength and stamina.
Let's get started.
So we're going to
start in Malasana.
Turn your feet out 45 degrees.
We're going to take
a nice slow breath.
Inhale, reach up.
Exhale, start bending the
knees, and pull through.
Drop into a squat.
And then we're just going
to extend the palms flat out
onto the ground.
Lengthening your spine, pull
your shoulders down the back.
Take a breath in your belly.
Let it expand out.
And then exhale.
Relax everything towards
the earth below you.
Eyes closed, I want you to
slow your breathing down.
Feel the blood rush
into your legs.
Feel the strength and
power of your legs,
thighs, of your hips, and
your tailbone lengthening down
towards the earth below you.
We'll take one
more big breath in.
And then exhale
softly out your mouth.
And we're going to slowly
start to slide your hands back.
And we're going to spin
our feet to parallel,
bringing your palms
to your shins.
Now shift your weight forwards
into the fronts of the feet.
I want you to draw
your shoulders back.
Feel the sides of the
neck, long breath in.
And then exhale.
Bend your knees so your
ribs come to the thighs.
Slide your hands
down to the floor.
Inhale, Ardha Uttanasana,
Halfway Position,
coming back up.
Exhale, forward
folding, Uttanasana.
And we're just going to
do that one more time,
just beginning to warm up
your legs and your low back.
Exhale.
This time just reach
across the opposite elbows.
I want you to give your
hamstrings a break.
So, knees slightly
bent, neck is relaxed.
We'll take one more
long breath here.
Exhale, softening,
deepening the fold.
And then inhale,
straightening legs.
Come up strong, legs flat back.
Reach and rise, arms
to the sky, inhaling.
Exhale and just draw a leg
down the center of your body.
Inhale, reach up.
Tilt the head back, look up.
Bringing the hands to the
forehead, hinge from the waist,
diving over the legs.
Nice and slow forward fold,
bend the knees if you need.
Inhale, come on up halfway.
We're going to slide our left
leg back into old-school lunge.
Exhale, drive your
hips down low.
Inhale, pull your navel
up, lifting the hips,
almost straightening
the right leg.
Exhale, warming up the legs and
the spine, opening it on up.
One more cycle.
Inhaling, lifting the hips.
Exhale, drive the hips through.
Stay on the fingertips light.
Heart, chest lifts.
Stepping back, right
leg into Downward
Facing Dog, right away
coming up onto the toes.
Lift up and around
out of your shoulders.
Pull the left knee in.
Step the foot through.
Exhale, old-school
lunge, hips sink club.
Inhaling, hips
rise, belly lifts.
Exhale.
Two more cycles nice and slow.
Move slow, breathe long.
That is the key factor.
One more time.
Exhale, sink it in.
Now I want you to connect
to your low belly.
One big step,
inhale, lengthening.
Exhale, fold.
Bend the knees if you need.
Strong legs flat back.
Inhale, reach and rise.
Exhale, hands down
the center line.
Inhale, reaching.
Exhale, hinge from the waist.
Slow movement, long breath,
slow and controlled.
Inhale, lengthening on up.
Once again, right
leg steps back, hips
sink low, chest, chin lifts.
We're going to reach your left
foot to the sky this time,
Downward Dog.
Now keep your hips
level first round.
Root your right heel down.
Now press through
your left ankle.
Internally rotate
your left thigh.
And then slowly come up
onto your right toes.
Lift the heel.
Pull the left knee into the
chest, looking forwards,
planting the foot.
And then, making sure
your feet are wide enough
so you're strong and stable
through your foundation,
inhale.
Peel the belly off the thigh.
Reach the arms back behind.
Spread the fingers.
So, shoulders back,
palms up, chest forwards.
Exhale.
Sit a little deeper
into your front leg.
Start bending the right knee.
And we're going to reach the
arms on up into Crescent Pose.
Good.
Tailbone scoops
under a little bit.
Take a big breath in.
And then as you exhale, push
off the ball of your right foot.
Straighten that leg out.
Inhale, reaching forwards.
Exhale, the left
hand onto the hip.
Now keep this hand
anchored here.
Pull it down and back.
Lightly place right
fingertips to the floor.
Hand stays anchored as
you roll the spine open.
And then when you're
ready, take the arm up.
Stay light under those
right fingertips.
Inhale, reaching up.
And then as you exhale,
soften into the twist
maybe a little bit more.
You can bring the hand down
to the floor or onto a block
if you need.
Keep firing the right thigh
up, heel reaching back.
One more breath in.
Exhale, soften, lean
back a little bit.
And we're going to
release hand to the floor.
From here, we're going
to come into Plank
with your left foot lifted.
Point the foot, spread the toes.
Look left.
Roll over onto the outer
blade of the right foot
for Side Plank.
Option A, feet stacked, ankles,
flex toes up to the face.
Option B, bring the
top for foot in front.
Inhale, reaching up.
And if you want to,
you can also exhale.
Reach forwards.
Now lift higher out of
the right side body.
Get longer through the left,
just for one more breath.
Stay through the exhale.
And then on inhale the
arm is going to go up.
Looking down, as the
hand comes to the floor,
pull the left knee in.
Now core is strong, press
out of the shoulders.
Feel your back body
stretch to the sky.
Inhale, set your
Plank up strong.
So crawl your toes forwards.
Reach your heels back,
thighs lifting Tailbone
tucks a little bit.
Press out of the shoulders.
Breath in.
Exhale.
You can always lower
the knees to the floor.
Otherwise, keep
the thighs lifting.
Elbows shave the ribs as
you come all the way down.
Lifting with the
strength of your back,
come on up into a Low
Cobra-- so almost as
if you can lift your
hands off the floor.
Lift with the strength of the
back, neck soft and relaxed,
breath in.
Stay through the exhale.
And then slowly sit back onto
the heels, Child's Pose, just
for a breath.
Inhale, shift back forwards
to the hands and knees.
Arch the spine.
Spread the fingers.
Open the chest.
Look up.
Curling the toes
under, push back
into Downward Facing Dog,
where we'll start to inhale,
coming up onto your toes.
Lift up and round
out of the shoulders.
Looking forwards, bend your
knees, sit back onto the hips.
And then step or float the
feet to the top, feet together.
So the big toes touch, heels
separated just a little bit.
Lengthen your spine.
Exhale, bend the knees if
you need, forward fold.
Good.
Drop into the hips.
Slowly inhale on
up into Chair Pose.
And then exhale.
Squeeze the glutes.
Come on to standing.
Take a breath in.
Exhale out the mouth, release
hands down and behind you,
open the front body.
Good.
Bend the knees.
Touch them out along the way.
Inhale, come back up
into Crescent Pose.
Exhale, dive forward,
and fold over your legs.
Inhale, lengthen on up halfway.
This time we're going to
step the left leg back.
Old-school lunge, hips sink
low, chest, chin lifts, look up.
And now, reaching the right heel
up to the sky, Downward Dog.
This first one, hips
level, internally
rotated the right thigh, big
toe facing straight down.
Take one more breath.
Lengthen your hips away
from the shoulders.
And then slowly come
up on your left toes.
Lift the heel.
Pull the right knee into
the chest, looking forwards.
With control, bring
the foot through,
setting your feet up wide
enough, stable, for Crescent.
Inhale, reach back.
Peel the belly
chest off the thigh.
Breath in, exhale, sit a little
deeper into the front leg.
Start bending that back
left knee a little bit.
Arms are going to reach on up.
Good.
Tailbone scoops under
just for one more breath.
Stay through your exhale.
And then inhale, reach forward.
Straighten out the left leg.
Thigh lifts, heel reaching back.
Exhale, right hand to the hip.
And then lightly place
left fingertips down.
Keep your right hand
anchored on the hip.
Slowly roll shoulder back.
And then when you're
ready, take the arm up.
Stay light on the fingertips.
You can always bring
your palm to the floor.
Make sure you're not dumping
all your weight into that arm.
You can also bring a
block underneath that hip.
Left thigh firing up strong,
reach your left heel back.
Inhale, reach up.
Exhale, lean back
a little deeper.
Soften.
Release, hand to the floor.
We're going to extend
the right leg back,
keeping it lifted in Plank.
That's Half Plank.
Look to your right.
Roll over onto the
outer blade of the foot.
Option A, feet stacked.
Option B, top leg
in front of you.
Good.
Lift higher out of
the left side body.
Exhale, reach
right arm forwards.
We're just going to take
one more slow breath here.
Emphasize it through the exhale.
Inhale, arm is going to go up.
Looking down, return
the hand to the floor.
And then immediately
pull right knee to chest.
Push out of the shoulders.
Draw everything into the
center core and lift.
Beautiful.
Inhale, Plank.
So you have that option
A, knees to the ground
or straight legs to
the ground, Low Cobra.
Option B, come on
down half way, elbows
to the middle of your ribs, and
then inhaling into Upward Dog,
option B. Take a breath then.
Exhale back,
Downward Facing Dog.
We'll take a couple of breaths.
So, heels down as best you can.
Maybe you need to bring your
feet forwards a little bit.
Make sure the hands are
shoulder width, about as wide
as the mat, fingertips spread.
Lengthen your hips away
from the shoulders.
Widen the shoulder blades
across the upper back.
Neck is relaxed.
Good.
Breath in.
Exhale out the mouth.
And let's go ahead right away.
Step the feet together.
This time we're going to
take the right leg up.
And now open the hip, reach
straight on up for the ceiling.
Point the foot.
Spread the toes.
Take your time.
Come up onto your left toes.
Lift the heel.
Right knee draws on
up into the chest.
Looking forwards, plant the foot
through, back heel to the floor
like Warrior 1 feet.
You may want to widen your
right foot a little bit.
Right hand to the hip.
Draw that hip back.
Look back to the left foot.
Make sure the inner arch
is lifted and strong.
So you're pressing firm
into the outer blade
and heel of that left
foot, looking forwards.
Left hand reaches.
Take a breath in.
Exhale, stay.
Good.
Right arm reaches forwards.
Inhale, Virabhadrasana
1-- Warrior I. Exhale,
pull it into the chest.
We're going to go through
a little movement cycle.
Inhale, lean back.
Exhale, push forwards.
Inhale, reach back behind
you, interlock the fingers,
let your hands draw
the chest on up.
Now you can, A, rest
your chest on the thigh
or drop it in, touch your mat.
And then inhale, reach the
hands forward, strong legs,
come on up.
Were doing two of those.
Exhale.
Inhale, lift the chest.
Exhale, lean forwards, push.
Inhale, reach back,
interlock your fingers,
climb back up the front body.
Exhale.
Keep your hips square.
Drop your chest.
Touch the mat along the way.
Inhale.
Reach and rise, last one.
Exhale, draw it in.
Inhale, open.
Exhale, lean forwards and push.
Inhale, climb back up the
front body, open the chest.
Exhale, drop it down.
And release, hands to the mat.
Reach forwards and up.
Inhale.
Strong legs-- we're almost done.
Good.
I know you're feeling
that right leg.
And let it go,
hands to the floor.
Let's take the right
leg up to the sky.
Bend the knee, draw the
thigh back, open the hip.
Good.
We're going to draw your
knee into the chest.
And then just circle it around.
Make a big circle.
Knee back to chest and
release, Downward Dog.
Feet together, let's
do the left side.
Left leg lifts.
Keep it straight.
Point your foot, spread the
toes, open through the hip.
So, reach for the sky.
And then, taking your time,
come upon onto the right toes.
Left knee draws on
up into the chest,
looking forwards, putting
the foot to the top,
back heel down.
Now get into the outer blade
and heel of that back foot,
left hand to the hip.
Pull tat hip back.
Inhale, right arm
forwards, pause.
Stay, exhale.
Hips stay square,
reach forwards.
Inhale, Vira 1, opposite side.
Inhale.
Good.
Exhale, hands to heart.
Inhale, open the front body.
Exhale, push forwards.
Inhale, reach back behind
you, interlock fingers,
and climb back up the
front body, inhaling.
Exhale, hip stays square.
Drop it down.
We're going to scrape our
fingers along the mat.
Reach forwards,
strong legs, come up.
Two more cycles, exhaling.
Inhale.
Exhale, lean forwards, push.
Keep connecting
to the outer blade
and heel of that right foot.
Inhale, come on up.
Exhale hip stays square.
Relax through the shoulders.
Touch the mat, inhale,
reach and rise.
Last cycle, bring it in.
Slow movement, long breath.
Exhale, lean forwards,
push forwards.
Inhale, climb it back up.
Open the heart, chest.
Exhale, completing,
almost there.
Strong legs, reach
forwards, come on up.
Beautiful.
Bring it in slow.
This is where you
want to slow down.
Nice.
Straight, left
leg, up to the sky.
And now bend the knee,
draw the thigh back,
make that feel good.
Nice.
Knee to chest,
make a big circle.
Knee stays bent.
Open the hip leg around to
the side, Downward Facing Dog.
And then we'll take
a few breaths here.
Press out at the shoulders.
See if you can lift
the big toes up
and spread the pinky
toes wide and down,
rooting your heels down.
Take a big breath in.
Exhale, pause, Child's Pose
just for a few breaths.
Sit back onto the heels, rest.
Good.
One more long breath in.
Exhale softly at the mouth.
And then slowly
sitting on back up.
Good.
So now we're just going
to come into Plank.
We're going to add five yoga
push-ups for the upper body.
We just did something really
strong for the low body.
A yoga push-up is
essentially long breath,
push-up to Chaturanga
or Plank to Chaturanga.
You can do this with
your knees to the floor.
Or I'm just going to
demonstrate from Plank.
It's right here,
elbows shave the ribs.
Don't dip the chest any lower.
I'm going to do knees
down with you guys.
So, give of them.
We'll move slow, breathe long.
Inhale, exhale down.
Inhale up, slow.
Exhale down.
Inhale up.
That's three-- two more.
Exhale down.
One last one.
Inhale.
Exhale.
Good.
Press back up.
Child's Pose.
Nice.
Take one more long breath
in through the nose.
Exhale softly out the mouth.
Hopefully, your heart rate
has come down a little bit.
Slowly inhale, shift forwards
to the hands and knees.
We're just going to arch
the spine, grip the mat,
pull the chest through.
Curl the toes under.
Exhale back to
Downward Facing Dog.
Right away inhale.
Come up onto your toes.
Lift up and round
out of the shoulders.
Exhale, bend the knees,
look forward, step or spring
to the top, feet hip distance.
Lengthen your spine, breath in.
Bend the knees if you
need, forward fold.
Inhale strong.
Reach and rise.
Exhale, hands to the heart.
Space, pause, breath in.
Exhale out the mouth.
So now we're going to
learn Thoppukaranam,
which is an ancient practice
often done at temples in India,
specifically in
front of Ganesha,
or the elephant-headed god,
the god of removing obstacles.
What we're going to do is take
your left hand, thumb in front.
Grab your earlobe first.
Right hand over top, thumb
in front, right arm on top.
And then all it is
is a simple squat.
So, sitting up
nice and tall, make
sure the knees
don't go too wide.
You want to inhale.
This is very specific--
inhale as you go down.
And then if you've
ever taken a syringe
and pulled up some liquid
or some water into it,
I want you to think
about that sensation
as you inhale going down.
As you exhale when
you're pulling up,
feel like you're drawing
energy up into the pelvis.
Ganesha is associated with the
root chakra, Muladhara chakra.
It's also associated
with the earth elemental.
So this specific practice
you should do daily
when you wake up 18 times to
increase the size of your root
chakra, and increase
your stability,
and strengthen the body.
Left hand first,
right hand in front.
If you have bad knees,
you can do this just
to about here, or wherever
it feels good for you.
If you have good knees, make
sure if it starts to feel bad,
back off, do less quantity.
We're just going to inhale down.
We're going to do this 18 times.
You do it as many
times as you can.
Inhale down.
Exhale up.
Last one.
Good, that's 18.
Inhale the arms up.
Spin your feet out 45 degrees.
Start bending the knees.
Pull through to
Malasana, Yogic Squat,
sitting up nice and tall.
Exhale at the mouth.
Nice.
Let's open up the
shoulders a little bit
and get a little bit of a twist.
So we're going move back,
hips over the knees.
Walk your hands out
in front of you.
Make sure the hips
don't cheat forwards.
And then all we're going
to do is thread the needle.
With the right arm across,
shoulder to the floor,
let the head be
relaxed the whole time.
Reach behind you,
grab the inner thigh.
Head stays relaxed, pull open.
And just take a couple
more breaths here.
Good.
And releasing, switching sides,
left shoulder to the mat.
Let's take the opposite around.
See if you can reach around
and grab the left thigh.
Let the head be relaxed.
Use this thigh
here and draw open.
Roll the shoulder back.
We're just going to take
one more big breath in.
Stay through the exhale.
And then release.
Come forwards onto your abdomen.
Watch closely.
We're going to take the
right knee up to 90 degrees.
And I'm going to
take same thing,
threading needle
with my left arm.
Shoulder to the floor, I'm
just going to flop over
into a nice relaxing twist.
Close Your eyes.
Start to slow your
breathing down.
And just feel that
warm blanket of gravity
being pulled over your
body, drawing you down
into the strength and the
stability of the earth
below you, arms stretched
open to embrace you.
Breath in.
Exhale softly out the mouth.
We're just going
to switch sides.
Lazily flip back
over onto the belly.
Straighten your right leg out.
And then start bending
your left knee up.
Thread the needle
and the right arm.
And all we're going to
do is just flop over
into the twist, opposite side.
Hopefully your heart rate
is starting to slow down.
And you can really
help in that process
by softening your breathing,
breathing with the nose.
I know some of you, this
may have been super cardio.
Trust me-- if you
breathe with the nose,
you need to build that muscle.
If you're having a
hard time, I know
sometimes it feels natural
to breathe with the mouth.
But see if you can
breathe with the nose.
Last breath in.
Exhale, stay.
And then shift back
over onto the belly.
We're going to push back to
lengthen out the low back just
a little bit.
Balasana, Child's Pose.
Couple breaths in
through your nose.
Like you're fogging a piece of
glass, exhale out the mouth.
One more breath in.
Like you're fogging a piece of
glass, exhale out the mouth.
Good.
And then slowly sitting on up.
We're going to move on to
our backs for our Savasana.
And get comfortable.
Spring the legs on
out in front of you,
feet about as wide as the mat.
Let the ankles fall open,
hands about a foot away
from the hips, palms up.
And I want you to
just close your eyes.
And then go back
to that sensation
of being drawn down into the
earth, that earth element
of strength and stability.
Breath is calm.
We're just going to
take one long breath in.
Breathe into your belly.
Let it fill, roll,
rise all the way up
into the top of the chest.
If you're pregnant,
don't hold your breath.
Otherwise, hold the breath.
Comfortably hold your breath.
Hold.
See yourself climbing to
the top of a mountain.
You're at the top.
Hold.
And jumping off, exhale.
Keeping your eyes closed,
just get a little movement
in your fingertips and toes.
The fingers and
toes are actually
associated with the
root chakra as well.
So bringing a little bit of
movement to fingers and toes
brings you back through the
body into the earth element.
And I'd like to
invite you to keep
your eyes closed all the way
up into the seated position.
We're going to
reach the arms up.
Give yourself a
bit of a stretch.
Exhale, knees into your chest.
Good.
Let the knees fall
off to the right,
right arm above you to rest
the head like a pillow.
And then you're just going
to press your left hand
to the floor.
Keep your eyes closed.
Come up to any comfortable
seated upright posture,
whatever you like.
Palms resting on the knees,
index finger and thumb
together, palms facing down,
sitting up tall, abdomen soft.
And I want you to tilt
your chest up two degrees.
And now bow your chin slightly
into the chest two degrees.
You'll feel the back of
your neck lengthen up.
Curl the tip of your tongue back
up on the roof of your mouth,
pointing upwards.
Hold it there softly.
Making sure your
abdomen is soft,
zero control over
your breathing.
And I invite you to just tune
in to the grounding energy--
called prana-- coming in
through the crown of the head
down to the belly.
And then, feeling that
exhale from the navel center
down to the earth, apana vayu.
And you can remain here
for as long as you like.
Namaste.
[MUSIC PLAYING]